RTL2832U is a demodulator chip with USB. It talks to other on-chip peripherals with I2C, and other means. It's settings can be accessed via blocks.

There's a [datasheet][1] available, but it doesn't document everything and is incorrect sometimes. The [`librtlsdr` (blog)][2] driver is a good reference. It does work, but the code is messy and not well documented. The linux driver source ([dvbt][3], [sdr][4]) is also a good reference to find registers and initialization procedure.

Registers are inconsistent width. They're really just a memory range. E.g. registers for the USB block are all documented as 32 bit, but higher bits are rarely used (at all?). `librtlsdr`'s register read/write functions either write 8 or 16 bits, but they also use functions to write whole byte ranges sometimes. The demod block mostly uses 8 bit registers, but what each bit means is spread across the data sheet, if it's documented in there at all. Some values are larger than 8 bit, so you could consider these 16 bit registers. After all, it's just a bunch of memory, so this distinction might be useless.

[Blog v3 teardown][5]

# USB control commands

Registers are read and written via USB control commands. Specifically they're vendor commands sent to the endpoint. The request `bRequest` is always 0. `w_value` is the address. For demod blocks this is `(address << 8) | 0x20`, which I only found via `librtlsdr`. For USB and system block it's the register offset, but these start at 0x2000 and 0x3000 for the USB and system blocks respectively. These two blocks also seem to be 0x1000 bytes long. The tuner block should work the same way, but is neither documented, nor used by librtlsdr. The ROM block can only be read for "ROM Code" according to the data sheet, but we had no success trying it. The I2C block relays commands via I2C. It's address is an I2C address. More on that later.

# Blocks

- 0: 5 pages 0..=4 of demod registers
- 1: USB
- 2: System
- 3: Tuner (not used by librtlsdr)
- 4: Rom (not used by librtlsdr, todo: investigate)
- 5: I2C

Block 5 just relays commands to I2C. The tuner can also be accessed via I2C, but via I2C. The tuner I2C is usually disconnected to avoid interference, but can be connected via the `IIC_REPEAT` flag (demod block, address 0x01, bit 3).

TODO: register dumps in `tmp/regs`

Block 4, ROM code, doesn't return anything. It always fails with "device stalled" error. We only tried to read starting from address 0, with a few lengths (0x100, 0x1000, 0xffff). We tried with a reset device, and a barely initialized (demod powered on).

# Initialization

First enumerate USB devices, filtering by known vendor/product IDs. Claim interface 0. `librtlsdr` performs a test if the device responds as expected, by enabling DMA and full packet mode in the USB SYSCTL register. This is what they do immediately after in `rtlsdr_init_baseband` anyway. When the test fails, they reset the device via USB.

1. Initialize USB:
 1. enable DMA
 2. enable full packet mode,
 3. set max packet size to 512. This is documented as 10 bit, so 1024 might work.
 4. stall endpoint. i think the stops the USB from sending data.
 5. reset FIFO

2. Power on demod:
 1. `librtlsdr` writes `0x22` to `DEMOD_CTL_1`, which isn't documented in the datasheet, or used by the linux driver. That register supposedly controls IrDA wakeup. It is `0x02` after powerup.
 2. enable PLL. reads from the DEMOD block don't work without it.
 3. ADC I/Q enable
 4. Release hardware reset.

3. Reset demod:
 1. set soft_rst to 1, then to 0. not documented, but also used by linux driver. probably resets the demod chip.

4. disable spectrum inversion and adjacent channel rejection.

5. clear digital downconverter shift. we can't find anything about this register. seems to be demod block, page 1, offset 0x16 and 0x17, and possibly some upper bits in 0x18 above pset_iffreq. needs to be investigated

6. clear pset_iffreq. The IF will be set to the tuner's IF later (if not using direct sampling)

7. set FIR filter

8. disable digital automatic gain control. there are 2 more unknown bits in that register that are set. another bit is probably for test mode.

9. configure "FSM". some kind of state machine for filtering. librtlsdr and linux sdr set this

10. disable AGC loops

11. disable PID filter. looks like you disable the filter output and then tell it to accept all rejected packets.

12. set normal I/Q datapath. also set some unknown mpeg option, possibly disabling it

13. enable Zero-IF. this is later enabled when using IF. also enable dc compensation, iq compensation, iq estimation for compensation(?)

14. "disable TP_CK0". We think this register might also control some power regulator monitoring. these are set, but meaning is unknown.

# Reset

See `rtlsdr_deinit_baseband`. Deinit the tuner, then disable demod PLL and I/Q ADC. librtlsdr keeps the hardware reset released.


## FIR Filter

`librtlsdr` and the linux sdr driver set the same default FIR filter at startup:

```
-54, -36, -41, -40, -32, -14, 14, 53, 101, 156, 215, 273, 327, 372, 404, 421
```

The RTL2832U uses these coefficients as a FIR filter at crystal frequency. They can be set in the demod block page 1 offset 0x1c, but must be encoded. The first 8 coefficients are encoded as `i8`, while the remaining 8 coefficients are encoded as packed `i12`. This results in 20 bytes for the encoded filter:

```plain
│00000010│                         ┊             ca dc d7 d8 │        ┊    ××××│
│00000020│ e0 f2 0e 35 06 50 9c 0d ┊ 71 11 14 71 74 19 41 a5 │××•5•P×_┊q••qt•A×│
```

TODO: Experiment with custom filters

## Test Mode

demod page 0, offset 0x19, bit 1. librtlsdr sets the whole byte to 0x03 for test mode.

From `rtl_test` we gather that in test mode the RTL2832U stream the sample number instead of actual sample data. It can be used to detect dropped samples

## "System"

The "system" block refers to a integrated 8051 processor. It handles GPIO, interrupts, IR remote, and DEMOD_CTL

## I2C

The I2C block is used to talk to other devices, some on which might be on-chip. E.g. the EEPROM is at address 0xa0. More importantly the tuner is interfaced via I2C. Normally though the tuner is disconnected and it must be connected via the IIC_repeat flag while sending commands to it.

In the application circuit the tuner is connected via different I2C pins I2C_SCLT, I2C_SDAT (assuming the T stands for tuner).

I2C addresses used in librtlsdr don't seem to be "right-aligned" - what `embedded_hal::i2c` uses. (see EEPROM)

## EEPROM

Datasheet application circuit shows "M24C02-W" EEPROM chip connected to I2C_SCL and I2C_SDA.

Blog v3 uses a 24C02N EEPROM ([source][5]). Looks like M-series is replacement for ST-series. 24C02 has 256 bytes (2048 bits). The smaller EEPROM variants have 128 bytes. rtl_eeprom defines `EEPROM_SIZE` as 256.

The EEPROM uses address 0xa0 (not right-aligned). So 0b1010xxxr, where x=0, but can be "don't care" (m23c02-w datasheet), and r is the read/write bit.

## GPIO

GPIO pins are managed by the system chip. There are 8 pins. They can be configured either as input or output. When configured as output their current value can be read as well. Registers:

`GPD`: Configure direct. 1=input, 0=output
`GPOE`: Enables output pin. If 0, tri-state/floating (todo)
`GPO`: Sets output state of pins. Can also be read.
`GPI`: Read input

Default functions as listed in the datasheet:
0: VDD1 power. 1=off. note the blog v4 bias-t that's on this pin is 1=on
1: selects clock source. depends on board. default 0=28.8mhz
2: LED? also mentions external I2C. so which is it?
3: input USB remote wakeup
4: output for antenna power control default 0=off (todo: is this the config FCxxxx uses?)
5: same as 1????
6, 7: reserved

Blog v4 (r82xx): pin 0 is the GPIO, pin 5 is upconverter

librtlsdr also toggles pin 4 on, then off, before probing FCxxxx tuners. For FC0012 pin 6 is configured as output (selects V/U band filter).


[1]: https://homepages.uni-regensburg.de/~erc24492/SDR/Data_rtl2832u.pdf
[2]: https://github.com/rtlsdrblog/rtl-sdr-blog/blob/master/src/librtlsdr.c
[3]: https://github.com/jaredquinn/DVB-Realtek-RTL2832U/blob/3c9e21225d2292fe0e6b885cd861fbebb890918a/src/demod_rtl2832.c
[4]: https://code.googlesource.com/linux/torvalds/linux/+/6d36c728bc2e2d632f4b0dea00df5532e20dfdab/drivers/media/dvb-frontends/rtl2832_sdr.c
[5]: https://www.onelectrontech.com/rtl-sdr-v3-teardown-and-analysis/
